--- 
title: Traits are more than interfaces
categories: programming
tags: rust
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
--- 

<!--more-->

I've been paid for writing Rust for 1.5 years now, but I still have
eye-opening experiences now and then.

Even though I've invested quite some time in learning functional languages, the
first language I've used a lot was C++ and I've written a lot of
object-oriented code. Given this background, I've mostly interpreted traits as
_Interfaces_ or _Abstract Classes_ as they're called in C++. However, that
doesn't do them justice. If you implement an interface, you create a new
class, that implements it, and the interface tells the compiler that there are
certain methods on the new class, which allows it to be mixed with other
classes that share the same interface.

You can use traits as interfaces perfectly well, but since you can implement a
trait for existing types, it's also a (weaker[^1]) replacement for function
overloading. That was not the revelation, btw. Because even when looking at it
as a tool that replaces function overloading, I always looked at it as the
possibility to overload the first argument of the function. The revelation was,
that it doesn't need to be the first argument. It could be any argument,
or **the return type**. That was the revelation. It's been in front of
my eyes all the time (e.g. with `str::parse`), but I never really realized that
that was something I could do myself easily. Now that I found out, I feel
empowered, and I figured that other people might enjoy this insight too. 

To round this short article out, I want to give a short example:
I'm currently working on a side project, a small scripting language. The VM of
this language stores data using an enum:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Serialize, Deserialize, Clone)]
pub enum Data {
    String(String),
    Vec(Vec<Data>),
}
```

(yes, currently only strings, or arrays of strings are supported). Since it's
statically typed, the VM knows the type of stored variables, so it's not
necessary to check which variant is in use, and I want to be able to just get
the data like this:

```rust
let bin_name = state.memory.get_as::<&str>(bin_ref);
```

The way to do this goes through this trait:

```rust
pub trait DataAs<'a>: std::fmt::Debug {
    fn get_as(data: &'a Data) -> Self;
}
```

As you can see, the `Self` type is used as return value. One might "unspoken"
think *"Self is the first argument, always"* because we've used it like that so
many times, but it's perfectly valid to use it like this. With this trait,
`get_as` can be implemented like this:

```rust
impl Data {
    pub fn get_as<'a, T: DataAs<'a>>(&'a self) -> T {
        <T as DataAs>::get_as(&self)
    }
}
```

and then be implemented for types, e.g. like this:

```rust
impl<'a> DataAs<'a> for &'a str {
    fn get_as(data: &'a Data) -> &'a str {
        if let Data::String(s) = data {
            &s
        } else {
            utils::bug!("tried to get Data as &str, but it is: {:#?}", data);
        }
    }
}
```

I hope some of you find this to be as eye-opening as I did.
Thanks for reading :)

## Addendum

The discussion in the [Reddit thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/12qg3n9/felix_blog_traits_are_more_than_interfaces/)
brought up two important points, that I want to include here:

### Generically implementing Traits

You can implement traits generically, for every type that implements another
trait, which is pretty powerful.  For example, you could define this trait:

```rust
trait TermFormat {
    // formats self as a string formated with the provided ansi term codes
    fn format<'a>(&self, formatting: impl IntoIterator<Item = &'a str>) -> String;
}
```

and then implement it for all Types that already implement Display like
this:

```rust
impl<T: std::fmt::Display> TermFormat for T {
    fn format<'a>(&self, formatting: impl IntoIterator<Item = &'a str>) -> String {
        let formatters: Vec<_> = formatting.into_iter().collect();
        format!("\x1b[{}m{}\x1b[0m", formatters.join(";"), self)
    }
}
```

so now, you can use it like this:

```rust
fn main() {
    println!("{}", "hello".format(["31", "1", "4"]));
}
```

which will print "hello" to your terminal in red, underlined and bold

### From and TryFrom

If you do want to do type conversions, it might be a good Idea to consider
implementing
[`std::convert::From`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.From.html)
or
[`std::convert::TryFrom`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.TryFrom.html)
instead of creating custom traits like I did above.

[^1]: I say weaker, because function overloading allows you to overload on all
    arguments, which is called *multiple dispatch* while traits only allow you to
    overload one argument, which is called *single dispatch*
